
Lauris Reiniks (born July 11, 1979 in Dobele, Latvia) is a Latvian pop music singer, songwriter, television host, and actor. Lauris has graduated from Jelgava Music college, studied, although never graduated, communication studies at the University of Latvia and trained as an actor in Los Angeles, California. He has released eight solo albums and singles in 11 languages. As a composer and recording artist Lauris Reiniks has received more than 20 National Latvian awards and has gained international recognition in the Baltic States. Lauris Reiniks is also the Season 1 winner of Latvian "Dancing With The Stars" show. The millions of views of his music videos on YouTube has unofficially made him a "King of YouTube" in Latvia.[1]

Lauris was born in the Latvian town of Dobele, grew up in a musical family in Tērvete. Lauris'  first appearance on television was at the age of 5, singing in a show called Neighbors Meet. As a kid and teenager, Lauris was a soloist in a pop-rock group called “AURI” formed by his father. Together with this band Lauris gained his first stage experience; participating in different children music festivals, contests and other musical activities.

The Reiniks family (mother Dace, father Arturs, sister Ruta) used to be one of the most active singing families in the country. They regularly appeared on a broadcast called "Spiets" (The Swarm) and toured around Latvia with concerts.

In 1988, Latvian Television noticed Lauris and offered him to host a new musical TV show called "Nošu Spēles" (Games of Music Notes).

The show brought Lauris together with the top popular Latvian composer Raimonds Pauls who invited Lauris to participate in several his music projects and record songs. This collaboration lasted for one year when Lauris realized he could write his own music and be an independent artist.

The management company "Aktiv Music" approached Lauris Reiniks in 2000 and offered him a record deal with Platforma Records company.  That was a moment when Lauris stepped into the "big" scene of Latvian pop music and started his way to fame.

Lauris Reiniks' most popular and renowned songs In Latvia are "Sirds Sadeg Neparasti", "Es Neesmu Neprātīgs", "Tik Balti", "Es Tev Apmulsis", "Tev Šodien Vienalga", "Es Esmu Tev Dzīslās" in a hit duet with his sister Rūta, "Pasakā" in a duet with Aisha and his 2010 Baltic smash hit "Es skrienu" (I'm running). Most of his Latvian songs are written in collaboration with Mārtiņš Freimanis who wrote lyrics to Lauris's music. Lyrics for songs in English are written by Lauris Reiniks himself, Dutch writer Edward Van De Vendel and American writer Gordon Pogoda. Most of Lauris Reiniks's hit songs in Latvian also have Estonian and Lithuanian versions performed by the artist himself. Estonian versions have been created in collaboration with Leelo Tungal, the Estonian writer and translator. Lithuanian versions have been adapted working together with Justinas Jankevičius and Deivydas Zvonkus, renowned Lithuanian writers and artists.

Ever since 1998 Lauris Reiniks has been hosting several TV shows for Latvian Television LTV, TV3 Latvia (Viasat) and LNT Television. Lauris has done several National TV commercials and print ads.
In 2010 Lauris gets his first National TV award "Zelta Vilnis 2009" (Golden Wave) in a nomination "TV Personality Of The Year".

Lauris Reiniks has been a host of following TV shows and projects:

On April 8, 2007 live on TV3 Latvia Lauris Reiniks becomes the first season winner of Latvian "Dancing with the Stars" (Dejo ar Zvaigzni). He was partnered by a professional ballroom dancer and many time Latin dance champion – Aleksandra Kurusova. In the spring of 2008, an ABC Television affiliate in California, USA presented a story about Lauris as a successful pop musician and winner of the Latvian version of "Dancing with the Stars".[17]

4 years later (2011) Lauris Reiniks is invited to participate in the same kind of show in Lithuania -"Šok su manimi" (Dance with me) on TV3 Lithuania. After 3 episodes, Lauris and his partner Aleksandra gave their place to the eliminated couple and withdrew from the show.

As an actor for film and television Lauris Reiniks has trained at private acting schools in Los Angeles. In 2009 he finished a program at TVI Actors Studio but in 2014 he got certified at "The Acting Corps" and "Speiser/Sturges Acting Studio" [18]

His acting credits include a role of Rolf in a musical The Sound Of Music in 2004/2005 
Olympus role in a musical "Autoplanet" in 2005. As a guest star he has appeared also on "Prāts vai Instinkts" LTV series produced by Riga Pictures (2010). 
(2011) "Dancis pa trim" (Three to Dance) feature film produced by "Kaupo" film studio where he is playing Edvards, a Latvian soldier during the latter stages of World War II. 
In 2010-2012 Lauris Reiniks is playing one of the lead roles in the well-known play "Ladies Night" (Kailie Brieži) produced by Domino Teatras and staged at National Theater in Riga.

In 2016 Reiniks joined the cast of TV3 Latvia hit series "Viņas melo labāk" (Women lie better) playing Igors, an ex-criminal who is hired to pretend to be a maniac in order to intimidate Marta, the lead character of the show. In 2018 his character returns to the show's 6th season as a car thief and emotional criminal.

2018 also brings Lauris Reiniks his first lead role in a feature film "Jaungada Taksometrs" (New Year's Taxi) where he is playing Andrejs, the taxi driver and main character of the movie. The romantic comedy is directed by internationally recognized director Māris Martinsons and produced by Kruk Films. "Jaungada taksometrs" is released in movie theaters across Latvia on November 30, 2018.

