
Brídín Ní Bhraonáin, professionally known as Brídín Brennan, is an Irish pop singer from Dobhar (Dore), Gweedore, County Donegal. She is the sister of Enya, Moya and Pól Brennan and has also toured with family-band Clannad.

Brídín Brennan is the youngest member of Ireland's most successful musical family, the Brennans. The family have collectively sold over 100 million records worldwide. The Brennan family, consisting of four brothers and five sisters, grew up in the remote North West Gaeltacht township of Dobhar in the Gweedore parish, County Donegal. Her Roman Catholic parents Leo and Baba nurtured a culture of music and song within the home.

Brídín's mother was the music teacher of a local school, her father Leo the frontman of the Slieve Foy Dance Band. The catalyst that propelled the entire family onto the stage was the opening of their family pub, Leo's Tavern in Meenaleck where the family still perform.

After tens of millions of album sales by her siblings, Brídín was expected to continue in their footsteps as a musician or singer. Later calling herself a rebellious teenager, Brídín decided to set out into what she thought would be the much more exciting world of hairdressing. Brídín soon worked as a top-hairdresser with Charles Worthington until her sister Moya Brennan asked her to join as a vocalist at Clannad's live performances.

Over the next seven years she gained a wealth of musical experience as she accompanied Clannad on tours throughout the world, took part in recording on some of their most successful albums and appeared with sister Moya on worldwide shows, Later... with Jools Holland in the UK and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in the United States among them.

She went on to work along with her other sisters, Olive and Deirdre on Moya Brennan's solo projects. The four part harmony became an integral part of Moya's first and second solo albums Máire and Misty Eyed Adventures. After a short break from the music business, Brídín went on to record her own album, Eyes of Innocence in 2005. She has infused some of her own tastes and experiences into a style probably best termed "chilled adult pop", a far cry from the traditional or classical style of her siblings. The album was not received well and was only released in Ireland, although it is also available to world audiences online. Two singles were released from the album for radio play: "Hang On" and "You Can't Hurt Me".

Brídín is married to Australian public relations Cameron Campbell. On Saturday 20 January 2007 Brídín gave birth to her first child, a baby girl called Sinéad.

