
Each time Intel launched a new microprocessor, they simultaneously provided a System Development Kit (SDK) allowing engineers, university students, and others to familiarise themselves with the new processor's concepts and features. The SDK single-board computers allowed the user to enter object code from a keyboard or upload it through a communication port, and then test run the code. The SDK boards provided a system monitor ROM to operate the keyboard and other interfaces. Kits varied in their specific features but generally offered optional memory and interface configurations, a serial terminal link, audio cassette storage, EPROM program memory. Intel's Intellec development system could download code to the SDK boards.

In addition, Intel sold a range of larger-scale development systems which ran their proprietary operating systems and hosted development tools –  assemblers and later compilers –  targeting their processors. These included the Microprocessor Development System (MDS), Personal Development System (PDS), In-Circuit Emulators (ICE), device programmers and so on. Most of these were rendered obsolete when the IBM PC became a de facto standard, and by other standardised technologies such as JTAG.

The SIM4-01 prototyping board holds a complete MCS-4 micro computer set including the first microprocessor, the 4004, introduced in 1971.[1]

The SIM8-01  prototyping board holding a MCS-8 micro computer set was released in 1972.[2]

The SDK-51 MCS-51 System Design Kit released 1982 contained all of the components of a single-board computer based on Intel's 8051 single-chip microcomputer, clocked at 12 MHZ. SDK-51 used the external ROM version of the 8051 (8031). Provides a serial port which can support either RS232 or current loop configurations, and also an audio cassette interface to save and load programs. Unlike some of Intel's other SDKs (e.g. SDK-85, SDK-86), the built-in monitor can only be controlled via the built-in QWERTY keyboard and cannot be commanded via the serial port. However, memory dumps and disassembly listings can be dumped out to the serial port, and it can also be used to transfer data to/from a connected PC in the form of Intel hex files. 

The 8080 System Design Kit (SDK-80) of 1975 provided a  training and prototype vehicle for evaluation of the 8080 microcomputer system (MCS-80), clocked at 0.5 MHZ (1.95 us instruction cycle time). The SDK-80 allowed interface to an existing application or custom interface development. A monitor ROM was provided.

The HSE-49 emulator of 1979 was a stand-alone development tool with on-board 33-key keypad, 8-character display, two 8039 microcontrollers, 2K bytes of user-program RAM, a serial port and cable, and a ROM-based monitor which supervises the emulator operation and user interface. The emulator provides a means for executing and debugging programs for the 8048/8049 family of microcontrollers at speeds up to 11 MHz. It interfaced to a user-designed system through an emulation cable and 40-pin plug, which replaced the MCS-48 device in the user's system. Using the HSE-49 keypad, a designer can run programs in real-time or single-step modes, set up to 8000 breakpoint flags, and display or change the contents of user program memory, internal and external data memory, and internal MCS-48 hardware registers. When linked to a host Intellec development system, the HSE-49 emulator system-debugging capabilities, with the development system program assembly and storage facilities, provide the tools required for total product development.

The SDK-85 MCS-85 System Design Kit was a single board microcomputer system kit using the 8085 processor, clocked at 3 MHz with a 1.3 us instruction cycle time. It contained all components required to complete construction of the kit, including LED display, keyboard, resistors, caps, crystal, and miscellaneous hardware. A preprogrammed ROM was supplied with a system monitor. The kit included a 6-digit LED display and a 24-key keyboard for direct insertion, examination, and execution of a user's program. It also had a serial transistor interface for a 20 mA current loop Teletype using the bit-serial SID and SOD pins on the CPU. The  maximum user RAM for programs and data, on the factory standard kit, was limited to 0xC2 or 194 decimal bytes. The full 256 bytes was available on the expansion RAM.  User programs could call subroutines in the monitor ROM for functions such as: Serial In/Out, CRLF, Read Keyboard, Write Display, time delay, convert binary to two character hexadecimal etc.

The Intel ECK88 8088 Educational Component Kit was released in 1979, and used the 8088 processor.

The SDK-86 MCS-86 System Design Kit is a complete single board 8086 microcomputer system in kit form. It contains all necessary components to complete construction of the kit, including LED display, keyboard, resistors, caps, crystal, and miscellaneous hardware. Included are preprogrammed ROMs containing a system monitor for general software utilities and system diagnostics. The complete kit includes an 8-digit LED display and a mnemonic 24-key keyboard for direct insertion, examination, and execution of a user's program. In addition, it can be directly interfaced with a teletype terminal, CRT terminal, or the serial port of an Intellec system. The SDK-86 is a high performance prototype system with designed·in flexibility for simple interface to the user's application.

The SDK-86 (System Design Kit) was the first available computer using the Intel 8086 microprocessor. It was sold as a single board kit at a cheaper price than a single 8086 chip because Intel thought that the success of a microprocessor depends on its evaluation by as many users as possible. All major components were socketed and the kit could be assembled by anyone having a limited technical knowledge thanks to a clear and complete assembly manual. The system could be used with the on-board keyboard and display or connected to a serial video terminal.

Intel EV80C196KB Microcontroller Evaluation Board

